README.md, before:

# Ress

A system for building mobile optimized Rails applications using semantic,
media query-based device detection and server side progressive enhancement.

## Background

Ress is an extension of the [devicejs](https://github.com/borismus/device.js)
library written by [Boris Smus](http://smus.com/). It adds a back end for
adapting server responses based on client side feature detection. Ress allows
you to specify alternate versions of your website, along with media queries
for which devices should be redirected to which version.

## How it Works

### HTML Annotations

When you register alternate mobile versions of your website, Ress adds annotations
to the `<head>` of your document that describe where these pages are located and
which devices should be redirected to them.

For example, a typical alternate version for a mobile site might include a tag
like this:

```html
<link rel="alternate" media="only screen and (max-width: 640px)" href="http://m.example.com/page-1" >
```

The mobile version of the page would then have a link pointing back the canonical
version:

```html
<link rel="canonical" href="http://www.example.com/page-1" >
```

These annotations conform to SEO best practices for mobile optimized websites
[as documented by Google](https://developers.google.com/webmasters/smartphone-sites/details).

### Feature Detection

When a request comes into your site, the javascript included with ress will parse
all of the `[rel="alternate"]` links in your markup, and evalute their media queries
to determine if there is an alternate version available that matches the client.
If there is, the user is redirected to the url for that version.

### Server Side Components

Ress allows you to customize how your Rails application responds to mobile requests in
two ways:

1. It adds controller and helper methods to detect which version of your site has
been requested. This is useful for small tweeks in html or behaviour, eg:

```erb
<% if mobile_request? %>
  <%= image_tag 'low-res.png' %>
<% else %>
  <%= image_tag 'high-res.png' %>
<% end %>
```

2. It prepends a view path for each alternate version of your site, so that you can
override the templates or partials that are rendered for certain requests. For example if
you want to render a different html form for creating users on the mobile version of your
site you could create `app/mobile_views/users/_form.html.erb` and Ress would have Rails
select that template over `app/views/users/_form.html.erb` when a request comes in to the
mobile version.


## Installation

Add this line to your application's Gemfile:

    gem 'ress'

And then execute:

    $ bundle install

Run the generator:

    $ rails g ress:install

## Usage

### Adding Alternate Versions

Alternate versions of an application are registered using the `#add_alternate` method in the
`ress.rb` initializer that is generated by the `ress:install` generator. The configurabe options
available are all documented in the [comments of that file](https://github.com/matthewrobertson/ress/blob/master/lib/generators/ress/templates/ress.rb).

### Version override

You can manually override the version detector javascript and allow mobile
clients to visit the canonical version of the app by passing in a the GET
url parameter `force_canonical=1`. This sets a session cookie in a `before_filter`
that stops the version detection scipt from redirecting users, so it only has to be
done once per session. Ress includes a helper / controller method `force_canonical` that returns
a link back to the canonical version of the current page with this query param appended.
For, example you may include something like this in your `<footer>` to let mobile users
access the canonical site.

```erb
<!-- Let mobile devices access the canonical site -->
<footer>
  <% unless canonical_request?  %>
    <div>
      You are currently viewing the mobile version of this site.
      <%= link_to 'View the desktop version', force_canonical_url %>
    </div>
  <% end %>
</footer>
```

### Dependencies

There are a couple of Modernizr features that must be included in order for
Ress's javascript feature detection to function. If you are not already
using Modernizr in your application you can automatically include a build that
has been packaged with the gem by setting `config.include_modernizr = true` in
`config/initializers/ress.rb`. If you include your own build (recommended),
make sure that it includes "Touch Events" and "Media Queries", eg:

http://modernizr.com/download/#-touch-mq-teststyles-prefixes

## Performance considerations

The javascript included by Ress does some checks and will use client-side
redirection to point users to the right version of your webapp. Client-side
redirection can have a performance overhead (though I haven't measured it).
If you find this is true, you can keep your DOM the same, still using the
SEO-friendly `<link rel="alternate">` tags, but simply remove the
ress.js script and do your own server-side UA-based redirection.

## Browser support

The feature detection javascript should work in all browsers that support
`document.querySelectorAll`. Notably, this excludes IE7. If you want it
to work in IE7 and below, please include a [polyfill](https://gist.github.com/2724353).

## Contributing

Given how many browsers and devices we have these days, there are bound
to be bugs. If you find them, please report them and (ideally) fix them
in a pull request.

1. Fork it
2. Create your feature branch (`git checkout -b my-new-feature`)
3. Commit your changes (`git commit -am 'Add some feature'`)
4. Push to the branch (`git push origin my-new-feature`)
5. Create new Pull Request

## Resources

Ress is the compilation of a few different ideas packaged up for Ruby on Rails. You
may want to look at the following articles for more info:

- [devicejs](https://github.com/borismus/device.js) -  a javascript library for client
side feature direction and the main inspiration for this gem. Boris has also provided
[a good write up about it](http://www.html5rocks.com/en/mobile/cross-device/) on
http://www.html5rocks.com/
- [Building Smartphone-Optimized Websites](https://developers.google.com/webmasters/smartphone-sites/details) - Google's
recommendations and best practices for building Mobile Optimized web apps
- [RESS: Responsive Design + Server Side Components](http://www.lukew.com/ff/entry.asp?1392) - an
article by Luke Wroblewski about combining Responsive Design and Server Side Components (the
inspiration for the name RESS).

Commit message:

Added some notes on development and config gotchas to the README

README.md, after:

# RESS

A system for building mobile optimized Rails applications using semantic,
media query-based device detection and server side component optimization.

## Background

RESS is an extension of the [devicejs](https://github.com/borismus/device.js)
library written by [Boris Smus](http://smus.com/). It adds a back end for
adapting server responses based on client side feature detection. RESS allows
you to specify alternate versions of your website, along with media queries
for which devices should be redirected to which version.

## How it Works

### HTML Annotations

When you register alternate mobile versions of your website, RESS adds annotations
to the `<head>` of your document that describe where these pages are located and
which devices should be redirected to them.

For example, a typical alternate version for a mobile site might include a tag
like this:

```html
<link rel="alternate" media="only screen and (max-width: 640px)" href="http://m.example.com/page-1" >
```

The mobile version of the page would then have a link pointing back the canonical
version:

```html
<link rel="canonical" href="http://www.example.com/page-1" >
```

These annotations conform to SEO best practices for mobile optimized websites
[as documented by Google](https://developers.google.com/webmasters/smartphone-sites/details).

### Feature Detection

When a request comes into your site, the javascript included with ress will parse
all of the `[rel="alternate"]` links in your markup, and evalute their media queries
to determine if there is an alternate version available that matches the client.
If there is, the user is redirected to the url for that version.

### Server Side Component Optimization

Ress allows you to customize how your Rails application responds to mobile requests in
two ways:

1. It adds controller and helper methods to detect which version of your site has
been requested. This is useful for small tweeks in html or behaviour, eg:

```erb
<% if mobile_request? %>
  <%= image_tag 'low-res.png' %>
<% else %>
  <%= image_tag 'high-res.png' %>
<% end %>
```

2. It prepends a view path for each alternate version of your site, so that you can
override the templates or partials that are rendered for certain requests. For example if
you want to render a different html form for creating users on the mobile version of your
site you could create `app/mobile_views/users/_form.html.erb` and Ress would have Rails
select that template over `app/views/users/_form.html.erb` when a request comes in to the
mobile version.


## Installation

Add this line to your application's Gemfile:

    gem 'ress'

And then execute:

    $ bundle install

Run the generator:

    $ rails g ress:install

## Usage

### Adding Alternate Versions

Alternate versions of an application are registered using the `#add_alternate` method in the
`ress.rb` initializer that is generated by the `ress:install` generator. The configurabe options
available are all documented in the [comments of that file](https://github.com/matthewrobertson/ress/blob/master/lib/generators/ress/templates/ress.rb).

### Version override

You can manually override the version detector javascript and allow mobile
clients to visit the canonical version of the app by passing in a the GET
url parameter `force_canonical=1`. This sets a session cookie in a `before_filter`
that stops the version detection scipt from redirecting users, so it only has to be
done once per session. Ress includes a helper / controller method `force_canonical` that returns
a link back to the canonical version of the current page with this query param appended.
For, example you may include something like this in your `<footer>` to let mobile users
access the canonical site.

```erb
<!-- Let mobile devices access the canonical site -->
<footer>
  <% unless canonical_request?  %>
    <div>
      You are currently viewing the mobile version of this site.
      <%= link_to 'View the desktop version', force_canonical_url %>
    </div>
  <% end %>
</footer>
```

### Dependencies

There are a couple of Modernizr features that must be included in order for
Ress's javascript feature detection to function. If you are not already
using Modernizr in your application you can automatically include a build that
has been packaged with the gem by setting `config.include_modernizr = true` in
`config/initializers/ress.rb`. If you include your own build (recommended),
make sure that it includes "Touch Events" and "Media Queries", eg:

http://modernizr.com/download/#-touch-mq-teststyles-prefixes

### Sessions and Cookies

In order to share sessions and cookies between the different subdomains used by the
alternate versions of your app, you need to configure the `:domain` option both in
the `config/initializers/session_store.rb` and when setting cookies. For more
information about how this works see this
[Railscast](http://railscasts.com/episodes/221-subdomains-in-rails-3).

### Development

Because RESS uses subdomains, while developing alternate versions you cannot
load your site via `localhost` or an IP address. If you want to test on
the same machine you are running your rails app on, you can load it through
http://lvh.me or install [pow](http://pow.cx/) and set up a `.dev` domain
for your app. If you need to test on a mobile device you might want to try
http://xip.io/.


## Performance considerations

The javascript included by Ress does some checks and will use client-side
redirection to point users to the right version of your webapp. Client-side
redirection can have a performance overhead (though I haven't measured it).
If you find this is true, you can keep your DOM the same, still using the
SEO-friendly `<link rel="alternate">` tags, but simply remove the
ress.js script and do your own server-side UA-based redirection.

## Browser support

The feature detection javascript should work in all browsers that support
`document.querySelectorAll`. Notably, this excludes IE7. If you want it
to work in IE7 and below, please include a [polyfill](https://gist.github.com/2724353).

## Contributing

Given how many browsers and devices we have these days, there are bound
to be bugs. If you find them, please report them and (ideally) fix them
in a pull request.

1. Fork it
2. Create your feature branch (`git checkout -b my-new-feature`)
3. Commit your changes (`git commit -am 'Add some feature'`)
4. Push to the branch (`git push origin my-new-feature`)
5. Create new Pull Request

## Resources

Ress is the compilation of a few different ideas packaged up for Ruby on Rails. You
may want to look at the following articles for more info:

- [devicejs](https://github.com/borismus/device.js) -  a javascript library for client
side feature direction and the main inspiration for this gem. Boris has also provided
[a good write up about it](http://www.html5rocks.com/en/mobile/cross-device/) on
http://www.html5rocks.com/
- [Building Smartphone-Optimized Websites](https://developers.google.com/webmasters/smartphone-sites/details) - Google's
recommendations and best practices for building Mobile Optimized web apps
- [RESS: Responsive Design + Server Side Components](http://www.lukew.com/ff/entry.asp?1392) - an
article by Luke Wroblewski about combining Responsive Design and Server Side Components (the
inspiration for the name RESS).
